BROWN ADIPOSE TISSUE
Brown adipose tissue constitutes 2%-5% of the newborn body 
weight, located mainly in the back, neck, and shoulders, but 
it is greatly reduced during childhood and adolescence. In 
adults it is found only in scattered areas, especially around the 
kidneys, adrenal glands, aorta, and mediastinum. The color 
of brown fat is due to both the very abundant mitochondria 
(containing cytochrome pigment) scattered among the lipid 
droplets of the fat cells and the large number of blood capillaries in this tissue. Brown adipocytes contain many small lipid 
inclusions and are therefore called multilocular (Figure 6–3). 
The small lipid droplets, abundant mitochondria, and rich 
vasculature all help mediate this tissue’s principal function of 
heat production and warming the blood.
Cells of brown fat are polygonal and generally smaller 
than white adipocytes; their smaller lipid droplets allow the 
nucleus to be more centrally located (Figure 6–4). Brown adipocytes are often closely packed around large capillaries and 
the tissue is subdivided by connective tissue partitions into 
FIGURE 6–4 Brown adipose tissue.
a
BV
b
(a) Brown adipose tissue is shown here around a small blood vessel (BV) and adjacent white adipose tissue at the top of the photo. 
Brown adipocytes are slightly smaller and characteristically contain 
many small lipid droplets and central spherical nuclei. If the lipid 
has been dissolved from the cells, as shown here, the many mitochondria among the lipid spaces are retained and can be easily 
discerned. (X200; PT)
(b) A diagram of a single multilocular adipocyte showing the 
central nucleus, numerous small lipid droplets (yellow), and many 
mitochondria. Also shown is a sympathetic nerve ending that 
releases norepinephrine to stimulate mitochondrial production of 
heat.
06_Mescher_ch06_p122-128.indd 126 26/04/18 9:56 am
Brown Adipose Tissue 127
CHAPTER 6 Adipose Tissue ■ Brown Adipose Tissue
lobules that are better delineated than the lobules of white 
adipose tissue. Cells of this tissue receive direct sympathetic 
innervation, which regulates their metabolic activity.
Function of Brown Adipocytes
The main function of these multilocular adipose cells is to 
produce heat by nonshivering thermogenesis. The physiology of brown fat is best understood from studies of the tissue 
in hibernating species. In animals ending their hibernation 
period, and in newborn humans, nerve impulses liberate norepinephrine into brown adipose tissue. As in white fat, this 
neurotransmitter activates the hormone-sensitive lipase of 
adipocytes, promoting hydrolysis of triglycerides to fatty acids 
and glycerol. However, unlike the process in white fat, liberated fatty acids of multilocular adipocytes are not released 
but are quickly metabolized, with a consequent increase in O2
consumption and heat production. This raises the temperature within the tissue and warms the locally circulating blood, 
which then distributes the heat throughout the body.
Heat production in brown adipocytes is greater than that 
of other cells because their inner mitochondrial membranes 
have greatly upregulated levels of the transmembrane protein uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1) or thermogenin. In the 
presence of free fatty acids, UCP1 permits the flow of protons 
from the intermembranous space to the matrix without passing through ATP synthetase complexes. Instead of producing 
ATP, the energy associated with this proton flow dissipates 
as heat.
